Refresh the Lighthouse article (#2455)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/speed/get-started.md

   limitations under the License.  -->
# Optimize website speed using Lighthouse

> This tutorial teaches you how to use Lighthouse, and other tools, in DevTools to find ways to make your websites load faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial teaches you how to use Lighthouse and other tools in DevTools to find ways to make your websites load faster.
```
better flow imo and doesn't detract too much from Lighthouse

> The **Lighthouse** tool provides links to content hosted on third-party websites.  Microsoft isn't responsible for and has no control over the content of these sites and any data that may be collected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Lighthouse** tool provides links to content that's hosted on third-party websites.  Microsoft isn't responsible for and has no control over the content of these sites and any data that may be collected.
```
balancing efficient terseness w/ clarity for ease of parsing, this change might be a better balance

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Prerequisites

> * You should have some web development experience, similar to what is taught in this [Introduction to Web Development class](https://www.coursera.org/learn/web-development#syllabus).

Reviewer: i'm uneasy with any statements like "you must not be a beginner".   actually beginners are welcome to jump into every page on the web, and if they happen to want a basic instruction page, we offer that.

It is possible to write this tut for beginners, so i'd aim to support that, while still offering a link for additional optional info.

Right now the sentence effectively says "You should not use this article, if."  "This article is not for you."  It is possible to have positive invitation framing instead, so recomm impl'g that.

* Install [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com) to edit source code.

* Install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org) to use it as a local web server.

* You don't need to know anything about load performance.  You learn about load performance in this tutorial.

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Introduction

In this tutorial, you improve the performance of [Margie's travel](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/travel-site/), a fictitious travel website that contains travel images, text descriptions, a few JavaScript-based user interactions, and an interactive map.

The source files for the website are at [MicrosoftEdge / Demos > travel-site](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/tree/main/travel-site). 

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Step 1: Set up the website locally

> First, set up the website locally so that you can make changes to it later:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, set up the website locally, so that you can make changes to it later:
```

1. Get the website's source code locally: [Download or clone the Demos repo](../sample-code/sample-code.md#download-or-clone-the-demos-repo).

1. Open the folder you just downloaded or cloned in Visual Studio Code.

1. In Visual Studio Code, click **View** > **Terminal** or press `Ctrl` + `` ` ``.

> 

Reviewer: is it better advice to not use Terminal, but use sep shell window?  If use Terminal inside VS Code, will need to restart web server every time you close VS Code window.  Might be ok here.  

Maybe mention that starting server from within a shell window gives more long-term running of the server.

Author: I think it's ok here. I don't expect the case where someone starts reading the docs, and then continues over multiple days, sometimes closing VS Code to be common. I think it's more likely that readers will spend a minimal amount of time on the docs, setting things up, and then using one of the sections only.

The other advantage I see is that we don't need people to start another app, or even know about external terminal apps at all. VS Code gives them everything they need.

>    Visual Studio Code displays the source files in the **Explorer** sidebar, and the **Terminal**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Visual Studio Code displays the source files in the **Explorer** sidebar, and displays the **Terminal**:
```
i was confused about whether "in" applies to Terminal.  disambiguated that.

>    ![VS Code, now setup with the source code](./images/vscode-setup.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ![Visual Studio Code, now set up with the source code](./images/vscode-setup.png)
```

1. In the terminal, type `npx http-server` to start a local web server.

1. In Microsoft Edge, go to http://localhost:8080/travel-site to open the website:

   ![The travel website demo in Microsoft Edge](./images/travel-site.png)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Step 2: Audit the site

Whenever you set out to improve the load performance of a site, always start with an audit.

The audit has two important functions:

*  It creates a **baseline** for you to measure subsequent changes against.

*  It gives you **actionable tips** on what changes improve performance the most.

#### Establish a baseline

The baseline is a record of how the site performed before you made any performance improvements.

> 1. In Microsoft Edge, open DevTools by pressing `F12` or `Ctrl`+`Shift`+`I` (Windows, Linux) or `Command`+`Option`+`I` (macOS).

Reviewer: I might re-check hidden comments template at bottom of DevTools Overview .md - my fav way to open DevTools is right-click > Inspect.  Does template show that way?

> 1. In Microsoft Edge, open DevTools by pressing `F12` or `Ctrl`+`Shift`+`I` (Windows, Linux) or `Command`+`Option`+`I` (macOS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To open DevTools, right-click the webpage, and then select **Inspect**.  Or, press `Ctrl`+`Shift`+`I` (Windows, Linux) or `Command`+`Option`+`I` (macOS).  DevTools opens.
```

> 1. Open the **Lighthouse** tool.  If you don't see the tool in the main toolbar, click the **More tools** (![More tools](../media/more-tools-icon-light-theme.png)) button.

Reviewer: template at 

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer/main/microsoft-edge/devtools-guide-chromium/overview.md
shows some alt wording:
```
1. In DevTools, on the main toolbar, select the **__** tab.  If that tab isn't visible, click the **More tabs** (![More tabs icon](../media/more-tabs-icon-light-theme.png)) button, or else the **More Tools** (![More Tools icon](../media/more-tools-icon-light-theme.png)) button.
```

> 1. Only keep the **Performance** category selected and clear all other categories. And keep all other options set by default. Here's an explanation of the different options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Select the **Performance** category, and clear all the other categories. For now, keep the other default options. The options are:
```
trying to keep focus off of the docs (avoiding "Here's an explanation"), and only write in terms of the tech/features.

>    *  **Mode**: set this option to **Navigation (default)** to run tests when the webpage loads, or set the option to **Timespan** to run tests during a given period of time, or set the option to **Snapshot** to run tests on the webpage as it appears now.

Reviewer: would benefit from trying other formatting.  Main idea at the moment:

avoid:
Do x y z if you want to A.
Use pattern order like:
If you want to A, do x y z.

So, flip the wording in this list/section.  Also consider table? (dubious?) for more skimmability.

>    *  **Device**: set this option to **Mobile** to simulate a mobile user agent string and a mobile viewport, or set the option to **Desktop** to test the webpage without any simulation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *  **Device**: To simulate a mobile user agent string and a mobile viewport, set this option to **Mobile**.  To test the webpage without any simulation, set the option to **Desktop**.
```

>    *  **Categories**: this option allows you to only run a subset of the tests available in **Lighthouse**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *  **Categories**: this option allows you to run only a subset of the tests available in **Lighthouse**.
```
better flow?

1. Click **Analyze page load**:

    ![The Lighthouse tool](./images/lighthouse-tool.png)

1. After 10 to 30 seconds, a report of the performance of the site appears:

   ![The report for the Lighthouse tool about the performance of the site](./images/lighthouse-report.png)

#### Handling report errors

> If you ever get an error in your **Lighthouse** report, try running the tool again from an **InPrivate** window with no other tabs open. Running **Lighthouse** from an **InPrivate** window ensures that you're running Microsoft Edge from a clean state.  Microsoft Edge Extensions in particular often interfere with the auditing process.

Reviewer: todo: attempt to reword to avoid negative framing, "extensions often interfere".  

Alt wording =?

> If you ever get an error in your **Lighthouse** report, try running the tool again from an **InPrivate** window with no other tabs open. Running **Lighthouse** from an **InPrivate** window ensures that you're running Microsoft Edge from a clean state.  Microsoft Edge Extensions in particular often interfere with the auditing process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you get errors in your **Lighthouse** report, try running the tool again from an **InPrivate** window with no other tabs open. Running **Lighthouse** from an **InPrivate** window ensures that you're running Microsoft Edge from a clean state.  Browser extensions can interfere with the auditing process.
```

Reviewer: maybe reword from colloquialism metaphor "clean slate" to more direct technical, eg "with a clean baseline environment"

![An error at the top of the Lighthouse report](./images/lighthouse-error.png)

To open an **InPrivate** window:

> 1. Click the **Settings and more** (**...**) button in the top toolbar of Microsoft Edge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the **Settings and more** (**...**) button in the upper toolbar of Microsoft Edge.
```
'top' connotes "best"; the change disambiguates

1. Click **New InPrivate window**.

1. Establish a new baseline in **Lighthouse**:

   ![The report for the Lighthouse tool about the performance of the site in a InPrivate window](./images/private-lighthouse-report.png)

#### Understand your report

###### Overall performance score

> The number at the top of your report is the overall performance score for the webpage.  Later, as you make changes to the code, the number displayed should rise.  A higher score means better performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The number at the top of your report is the overall performance score for the webpage.  Later, as you make changes to the code, the number displayed should increase.  A higher score means better performance.
```

![The overall performance score](./images/overall-score.png)

> ###### Metrics

Reviewer: An outline check:  todo: I will extract from local VS Code and post here.

> The **Metrics** section provides quantitative measurements of the performance of the webpage.  Each metric provides insight into a different aspect of the performance.  For example, **First Contentful Paint** tells you when content first appears on the screen, which is an important milestone in the user's perception of the page load, whereas **Time To Interactive** marks the point at which the page appears ready enough to handle user interactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Metrics** section provides quantitative measurements of the performance of the webpage.  Each metric provides insight into a different aspect of the performance.  For example:

*  **First Contentful Paint** tells you when content first appears on the screen, which is an important milestone in the user's perception of the page load.
*  **Time To Interactive** marks the point at which the page appears ready enough to handle user interactions.
```
distinct points, so sep sent's [now revised as separate list items] for bite-sized readability

> ![The Metrics section](./images/metrics-section.png)

Reviewer: consider moving up to after sentence "The **Metrics** section provides quantitative measurements of the performance of the webpage:"
and add colon to make that sentence serve as lead-in for image.

> Click **Expand view** to display a description for each metric.  Then click **Learn More** to read documentation about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Expand view** to display a description for each metric.  Then click **Learn More** to read documentation about it:
```
it's a lead-in sentence for image, so colon to glue flow

![The expanded metrics section](./images/metrics-learn-more.png)

###### Screenshots

> Below the **Metrics** section is a collection of screenshots that show you how the page looked as it loaded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below the **Metrics** section is a collection of screenshots that show you how the page looked as it loaded:
```

![Series of screenshots showing how the page looked while loading](./images/report-screenshots.png)

###### Opportunities

> The **Opportunities** section provides specific tips on how to improve the load performance of this specific webpage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Opportunities** section provides tips on how to improve the load performance of this specific webpage:
```

![The Opportunities section](./images/opportunities-section.png)

> Click an opportunity to display more information about it, and then click **Learn more** to read documentation about why an opportunity is important, and specific recommendations on how to fix it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click an opportunity to display more information about it, and then click **Learn more** to read about why an opportunity is important, and specific recommendations on how to fix it:
```
"documentation" is implicit and i try to keep the spotlight on tech, not on docs (try to write words about tech, not about docs)

> ![An expanded opportunity, with more information, and a learn more link](./images/expanded-opportunity.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![An expanded opportunity, with more information, and a Learn More link](./images/expanded-opportunity.png)
```

###### Diagnostics

The **Diagnostics** section provides more information about factors that contribute to the load time of the page:

![The Diagnostics section](./images/diagnostics-section.png)

###### Passed audits

The **Passed audits** section shows you what the site is doing correctly.  Click **Show** to expand the section:

![The Passed Audits section](./images/passed-audits-section.png)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Step 3: Experiment

> The **Opportunities** section of your report gives you tips on how to improve the performance of the webpage.  In this section, you implement the recommended changes to the codebase, auditing the site again after each change to measure how it affects site speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Opportunities** section of your report gives you tips on how to improve the performance of the webpage.  In this section, you implement the recommended changes to the code base, auditing the site again after each change to measure how that change affects site speed.
```
nice to do: Find "code base" vs "codebase" in style guides.  guessing the std is sep words

#### Resize images

> Your report indicates that serving appropriately sized images is one of the top opportunities for improving the performance of the page.  Resizing images helps reduce the size of the network payload.  If your user is viewing your images on a mobile device screen that is 500-pixels-wide, there's really no point in sending a 1500-pixel-wide image.  Ideally, you send a 500-pixel-wide image, at most.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your report indicates that serving appropriately sized images is one of the top opportunities for improving the performance of the page.  Resizing images helps reduce the size of the network payload.  If your user is viewing your images on a mobile device screen that is 500 pixels wide, there's really no point in sending a 1500-pixel-wide image.  Ideally, you send a 500-pixel-wide image, at most.
```
hyphens when definitely an adj phrase.  there are some gray-area cases

> In the **Opportunities** section of your report, click **Properly size images** to display which images to resize. **Lighthouse** lists four `.jpg` files you should resize to improve load time:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the **Opportunities** section of your report, click **Properly size images** to display which images to resize. **Lighthouse** lists four `.jpg` files that you can resize to improve load time:
```
possibly keep more optional gentle wording, IF it's conceivable that Dev might choose better resolution by keeping existing size.  tech review this change.  Is it always "should", or depends on crispness of the particular file?

![The Opportunities section showing four images to be optimized, along with the potential data savings](./images/resize-images.png)

Before resizing these images, verify the amount of data the server must send to the browser to display these images:

1. Open the **Network** tool.

    If the tool is empty, refresh the page.

1. In the **Filter** text box, type `.jpg` to filter the list of requests and only show the four images.

    To learn more about filtering requests in the **Network** tool, see [Filter requests](../network/reference.md#filter-requests) in _Network features reference_.

> 1. Check the **Network** tool bottom toolbar to verify the amount of data transferred because of the images:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check the bottom toolbar in the **Network** tool to verify the amount of data transferred because of the images:
```

    ![The Network tool, showing the four image requests, and the total amount of data transferred](./images/network-tool-images.png)

    The bottom toolbar shows that the four images contribute 16.4 MB of the total 17.3 MB of data transferred for this webpage.

Next, resize the images and run a new audit:

> 1. In Visual Studio Code, open the `/travel-site/assets/img/optimized/` folder in the **Explorer**, which contains a copy of the four images displayed on the webpage, but already optimized for you. These images are 1000 pixels wide, and use the more optimized `.webp` format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In Visual Studio Code, open the `/travel-site/assets/img/optimized/` folder in the **Explorer**, which contains a copy of the four images that are displayed on the webpage, already optimized for you. These images are 1000 pixels wide, and they use the more optimized `.webp` format.
```

    Resizing images depends on your operating system. For example, to resize images on Windows, you can use **PowerToys**. To learn more, see [Image Resizer utility](/windows/powertoys/image-resizer).

1. Open the `/travel-site/index.html` file and replace the four image paths as follows:

    * Replace the four instances of `assets/img/` in the file with `assets/img/optimized`.

    * Replace the four instances of `.jpg` in the file with `.webp`.

1. In **Lighthouse**, click **Run an audit** (![Run an audit icon](./images/perform-icon.msft.png)) to go back to the main **Lighthouse** page without losing your baseline report.

1. Click **Analyze page load** again to see how the change affects load performance:

    ![An Audits report after resizing images](./images/report-after-image-resize.png)

Your score increased from 18 to 26. To verify how much data you saved, use the **Network** tool like you did before:

![The Network tool, showing the four image requests again, and the lower total amount of data transferred](./images/network-tool-images-after.png)

> Now, the images on the webpage only require to transfer 360 KB of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, the images on the webpage only require transferring 360 KB of data.
```
instead of how much before?  I'd add like:

Now, the images on the webpage only require transferring 360 KB of data, instead of 1.234 MB.

###### Automatically resize images

For a small app, doing a one-off resize like this might be good enough. But for a large app, consider these strategies for managing images:

*  Automatically resize images during your build process.

*  Create multiple sizes of each image during the build process and then use `srcset` in your code. At runtime, the browser takes care of choosing which size is best for the device. To learn more, see [Responsive images](https://web.dev/responsive-images/) at web.dev.

*  Use an image CDN that lets you dynamically resize an image when you request it.

> *  At least, optimize each image.  can often create huge savings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  At least, optimize each image.  This can often create huge savings.
```
typo

> Optimization is when you run an image through a special program that reduces the size of the image file.  For more tips, see [Essential Image Optimization](https://images.guide).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Optimization_ means running an image through a program that reduces the size of the image file.  For more tips, see [Essential Image Optimization](https://images.guide).
```

#### Reduce unused JavaScript

Your latest **Lighthouse** report says that the webpage contains unused JavaScript code and that loading this code only when required would decrease the amount of data transferred when the page loads.

Click **Reduce unused JavaScript** to reveal the JavaScript files that contain the most unused code:

> ![The Lighthouse opportunity section showing the unused JS message](./images/unused-javascript-opportunity.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![The Lighthouse opportunity section showing the unused JavaScript message](./images/unused-javascript-opportunity.png)
```
need to check rendered page.  maybe write:
showing the "Unused JavaScript" message

> The reported JavaScript files are from the `www.bing.com` domain, which means the unused code comes from the Bing Map component used on the webpage. Scroll down on the Margie's travel demo website to see the map:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reported JavaScript files are from the `www.bing.com` domain, which means the unused code comes from the Bing Map component used on the webpage. Scroll down on the **Margie's Travel** demo website to see the map:
```

![The map component on the demo website](./images/travel-site-map-component.png)

To confirm the amount of unused code and possibly find other resources that are unused, use the **Coverage** tool:

1. In DevTools, press `Ctrl`+`Shift`+`P` (Windows, Linux) or `Command`+`Shift`+`P` (macOS) to open the Command Menu, start typing `Coverage`, and then select **Show Coverage** in the list.

    ![The Command Menu in DevTools, showing the Show Coverage command](./images/command-menu-coverage.png)

> 1. In the **Coverage** tool, click **Start instrumenting coverage and refresh the page** (![Refresh icon](../media/reload-icon.msft.png)). The **Coverage** tool provides an overview of how much of the JavaScript and CSS code loaded on the page runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Coverage** tool, click **Start instrumenting coverage and refresh the page** (![Refresh icon](../media/reload-icon.msft.png)). The **Coverage** tool provides an overview of how much of the JavaScript and CSS code that's loaded on the page runs.
```

    ![The Coverage tool, in the Drawer panel, showing the report of how much code is unused](./images/coverage-report.png)

> The coverage report confirms that the Bing Map dependencies contain code that's unused when the page loads. The map on the demo website isn't visible when the page first loads. Loading the Bing Map only when it becomes visible to users is a good opportunity to improve performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The coverage report confirms that the Bing Map dependencies contain code that's unused when the page loads. The map on the demo website isn't visible when the page first loads.  There's a good opportunity to improve performance by loading the Bing Map only when that section of the page becomes visible to users.
```

> Use the Intersection Observer API to detect when the map becomes visible to the user. The Intersection Observer API provides a way to observe changes in the intersection of a target element, the map in this case, with the webpage's viewport. To learn more, see [Intersection Observer API](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Intersection_Observer_API) at MDN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the Intersection Observer API to detect when the map becomes visible to the user. The Intersection Observer API provides a way to observe changes in the intersection of a target element (the map, in this case) with the webpage's viewport. To learn more, see [Intersection Observer API](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Intersection_Observer_API) at MDN.
```
bracketing-aside the detail, to show the main flow of the sentence

1. In Visual Studio Code, open the `/travel-site/index.html` file and scroll down to the bottom of the file. The Bing Map API is loaded by using a `<script>` tag:

>     ![VS Code, showing the index.html code and the Bing map script tag](./images/bing-map-script.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![Visual Studio Code, showing the index.html code and the Bing map script tag](./images/bing-map-script.png)
```

    Below this line is another line that's responsible for configuring and loading the map in the right place: `<script src="assets/map.js"></script>`

1. Delete these two lines and add this new line instead: `<script src="assets/map-on-demand.js"></script>`.

>     ![VS Code, showing the index.html code and the new on-demand map script tag](./images/bing-map-on-demand-script.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![Visual Studio Code, showing the index.html code and the new on-demand map script tag](./images/bing-map-on-demand-script.png)
```

>     ![VS Code, showing the index.html code and the new on-demand map script tag](./images/bing-map-on-demand-script.png)

Reviewer: change dir name from /images/ to /get-started-images/ and put at same level as .md file.

I need to double check this to check my understanding... eg see if this dir already exists or is entirely new.  To see if focus-mode PR is affected.

Author: This directory already existed before. But was actually not used at all. So it's fine to rename it. I will do this now.

    If the user scrolls to a point where the map container element becomes visible in the viewport, and if the map isn't initialized yet, the code creates a new `script` element, sets its `src` attribute to the Bing Map API, and inserts the `script` into the page.

    The rest of the `map-on-demand.js` file is the same as the `map.js` file. As soon as the Bing Map API loads, the `GetMap` function runs. `GetMap` configures and displays the map in the container element.

1. Save your changes in Visual Studio Code, then refresh the webpage in Microsoft Edge, and run a new audit in the **Lighthouse** tool to see how your changes affect the load performance:

    ![The Lighthouse tool report showing a better score after the changes](./images/lighthouse-report-without-map.png)

    Your **Lighthouse** score is now at 31, which is an improvement from before, but there are more things to optimize.

#### Eliminate render-blocking resources

The next opportunity displayed in the **Opportunities** section of the **Lighthouse** tool is related to eliminating render-blocking resources.

> A render-blocking resource is an external JavaScript or CSS file that the browser must download, parse, and run before it displays the page. The more render-blocking resources need to be processed when a webpage loads, the longer the webpage needs to start appearing in the browser. Try to only run the core CSS and JavaScript code that's required to display the initial state of the page properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A render-blocking resource is an external JavaScript or CSS file that the browser must download, parse, and run before it displays the page. The more render-blocking resources need to be processed when a webpage loads, the longer the webpage needs, to start appearing in the browser. Try to only run the core CSS and JavaScript code that's required to display the initial state of the page properly.
```

The first task, then, is to find code that you don't need to run on page load.

1. Click **Eliminate render-blocking resources** to display the resources that are blocking:

   ![More information about the Eliminate render-blocking resources opportunity](./images/render-blocking-css.png)

>     **Lighthouse** displays a list of the stylesheets that the demo webpage uses, such as: `base.css`, `home.css`, `map.css`, and others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **Lighthouse** displays a list of the stylesheets that the demo webpage uses, such as `base.css`, `home.css`, and `map.css`.
```
"such as" is func'ly redun. w/ "and others"

1. Open the **Coverage** tool again: press `Ctrl`+`Shift`+`P` (Windows, Linux) or `Command`+`Shift`+`P` (macOS), type `Coverage`, and then select **Show Coverage**.

> 1. Click **Start instrumenting coverage and refresh the page** (![Refresh icon](../media/reload-icon.msft.png)) to display the coverage report, and then type `css` in the **URL filter** field to only display the CSS files:

Author: I would rather do this in a repro-wide image cleanup task (possible after Focus Mode) rather than here. If this image is used in many other places (which it probably is), this will increase this PR's size substantially for unrelated things.

   ![The new Coverage report, now showing the CSS files](./images/coverage-report-css.png)

>     The report shows that the `contact-form.css` and `gallery.css` files aren't used at all. They both have 100% of unused bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The report shows that the `contact-form.css` and `gallery.css` files aren't used at all. They both have 100% unused bytes.
```

1. Click the `contact-form.css` file in the report.  DevTools opens the file in the **Sources** tool.  If a line of code ran, a blue bar appears next to it.  A red bar means the line of code didn't run, and is definitely not needed on load of the webpage.

   ![The contact-form.css file in the Sources tool, with red bars next to the unused lines](./images/unused-css-source.png)

>    Only red bars are displayed in this source file, which means that the webpage does not need this file at all. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Only red bars are displayed in this source file, which means that the webpage doesn't need this file at all. 
```
sometimes separate words are needed for emph but here contraction (per style guide) flows better

Now, remove the references to these files from the code:

1. In Visual Studio Code, open the `/travel-site/index.html` file.

1. Near the top of the file, find the list of `<link>` tags that load the stylesheets on the page.

1. Delete the two lines of code that load the `contact-form.css` and `gallery.css` files:

>     ![VS Code, with the index.html opened, showing where the two link tags are](./images/delete-unused-css.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![Visual Studio Code, with the index.html opened, showing where the two link tags are](./images/delete-unused-css.png)
```
GLOBAL in PR: Find "VS Code".  (though the official docs sometimes write "VS Code")

1. Save your changes in Visual Studio Code, then refresh the webpage in Microsoft Edge, and run a new audit in the **Lighthouse** tool again to see how your changes affect the load performance.

> ###### Automatically remove non-critical CSS

Reviewer: i'd have to check context - change from h5 to h4 or h6?  often pattern h2/h4/h6 works well for spread of sizes given current LMC css

> In the previous step, your score improved slightly but **Lighthouse** still flags other CSS files as blocking the initial render of the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous step, your score improved slightly, but **Lighthouse** still flags other CSS files as blocking the initial render of the page.
```

The webpage uses the remaining CSS files so you can't remove them. However, it's possible to split them in two groups:

* Critical CSS code that needs to block the rendering of the webpage because it visually impacts the style and layout of the part of the webpage that users see when it loads.

    For example, the title on the webpage uses the `header h1` CSS rule in the `/travel-site/assets/base.css` file.

> * Non-critical CSS code used to render parts of the page that aren't visible when the page loads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Non-critical CSS code that's used to render parts of the page that aren't visible when the page loads.
```
to prevent mis-parsing as

* Non-critical CSS code previously (in the past) rendered parts of the page

    For example, the `/travel-site/assets/desktop.css` file is only needed when the viewport is larger than `665px`.

> To automatically split your CSS code this way, you can use the _Critical_ tool. To learn more, see the [Critical project repository](https://github.com/addyosmani/critical) at GitHub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To automatically split your CSS code this way, you can use the _Critical_ tool. To learn more, see the [Critical project repo](https://github.com/addyosmani/critical).
```
globally i'm omitting "at github" when say "see repo", b/c "repo" already probably means GitHub.

i think "repo" is clearer than "repository", which is almost an unfamiliar word, like "enum" vs "enumeration".  corp style guide's principle of "be informal" can support, IMO.

> You can then load your non-critical CSS code in a way to doesn't block the initial render of the page. To learn more, see [Defer non-critical CSS](https://web.dev/defer-non-critical-css/) at web.dev.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can then load your non-critical CSS code in a way that doesn't block the initial render of the page. To learn more, see [Defer non-critical CSS](https://web.dev/defer-non-critical-css/) at web.dev.
```
typo

It's also good to minify your CSS code and remove unneeded whitespace characters and comments. To learn more, see [Minify CSS](https://web.dev/minify-css/) at web.dev.

#### Reduce layout shift by setting explicit width and height on images

In your **Lighthouse** report, the **Diagnostics** section suggests defining explicit `width` and `height` for image elements. Click on **Image elements do not have explicit width and height**  to display more information:

> ![The Lighthouse diagnostics section about setting explicit width and height to images](./images/explicit-image-size.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![The Lighthouse diagnostics section about setting explicit width and height for images](./images/explicit-image-size.png)
```
seems typo

> The report says that the image at the top of the webpage doesn't have an explicit `width` and `height`, which can cause layout shifts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The report says that the image at the top of the webpage doesn't have an explicit `width` and `height` setting, which can cause layout shifts.
```
I'd want to study context more, to double check if this improves

Author: I think we should use "attributes" instead here, as this is actually what's needed.

> Layout shifts occur when portions of a webpage initially appear in one place but move to another position during the load of the page. For example, when an image loads, the browser doesn't know how much space to reserve for it until the image is fully loaded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Layout shifts occur when portions of a webpage initially appear in one place but then move to another position during the load of the page. For example, when an image loads, the browser doesn't know how much space to reserve for it until the image is fully loaded.
```

> To prevent layout shifts caused by loading images on a webpage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent layout shifts caused by loading images on a webpage, do either of the following:
```
standard construction enables parallelism of list items

> * Either define each image's `width` and `height` attributes in the HTML code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Define each image's `width` and `height` attributes in the HTML code.
```

> * Or reserve the space in CSS by using the `aspect-ratio` CSS property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Reserve the space in CSS by using the `aspect-ratio` CSS property.
```

To learn more, see [Images without dimensions](https://web.dev/optimize-cls/#images-without-dimensions) in _Optimize Cumulative Layout Shift_ at web.dev.

In the following steps, you use the `aspect-ratio` CSS property to avoid layout shifts:

1. In Visual Studio Code, open the `/travel-site/assets/home.css` file, and then search for the CSS rule that has the `.hero-image img` selector.

1. Modify the CSS rule so it looks like this:

    ```css
    .hero-image img {
      width: calc(100% + 2 * var(--main-margin));
      position: relative;
      left: calc(-1 * var(--main-margin));
      aspect-ratio: 1.5;
      object-fit: cover;
    }
    ```

    Before this change, the CSS rule already contained a `width` property, so the browser knew how much horizontal space to reserve for the image. By adding the `aspect-ratio` property, you tell the browser how much vertical space to reserve too. By adding the `object-fit` property, you avoid distorting the image if its CSS dimensions don't match the actual image file's dimensions.

1. Open the `/travel-site/assets/desktop.css` file, and then search for the CSS rule that has the same `.hero-image img` selector.

>     The `desktop.css` file is used only when the viewport is larger than `665px`, so when the webpage is displayed on a large screen, for example when used on a laptop computer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The `desktop.css` file is used only when the viewport is larger than `665px`, for when the webpage is displayed on a large screen, for example when used on a laptop computer.
```
a kind of typo

1. Modify the CSS rule so it looks like this:

    ```css
    .hero-image img {
        width: 100%;
        position: static;
        aspect-ratio: 2.5;
        object-fit: cover;
    }
    ```

    This time, the CSS rule already had a `width` and `object-fit` defined. But instead of defining a `max-height` for the image, you use the `aspect-ratio` property to make sure the browser knows exactly how much space to reserve for the image on desktop devices.

1. Save your changes in Visual Studio Code, then refresh the webpage in Microsoft Edge, and run a new audit in the **Lighthouse** tool to see how your changes affect the load performance:

>     Your score is now up to 37, but more importantly the **Cumulative Layout Shift** score is down to 0 indicating that there are no more shifts in the layout as the page loads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Your score is now up to 37, but more importantly the **Cumulative Layout Shift** score is down to 0, indicating that there are no more shifts in the layout as the page loads.
```

    ![The Lighthouse tool report showing a better score after the aspect-ratio changes](./images/lighthouse-report-with-aspect-ratio.png)

> #### Do less main thread work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Do less work in the main thread
```

Your latest report shows high **Time to Interactive** and **Total Blocking Time** metric values, which means that there's still something on the webpage that takes a long time to run and prevents the page from being usable for several seconds.

> Scroll down to the **Diagnostics** section which says to **Minimize main-thread work** and **Reduce JavaScript execution time**. The main-thread is where the browser does most of the work that's needed to display a page, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scroll down to the **Diagnostics** section which says to **Minimize main-thread work** and **Reduce JavaScript execution time**. The main thread is where the browser does most of the work that's needed to display a page, such as:
```
tech review this change.  if UI shows "main-thread", maybe ignore this suggested change

Use the **Performance** tool to analyze what work the main thread is doing while the page loads, and find ways to defer or remove unnecessary work:

1. Open the **Performance** tool.

1. In the **Performance** tool, click **Start profiling and reload the page** (![Refresh](../media/reload-icon.msft.png)), and then click **Stop** once the page has fully loaded.

    DevTools displays a visualization of all the work that the browser performed in order to load the page. This visualization is referred to as the **trace**:

    ![The Performance tool trace of the page load](./images/performance-trace.png)

The trace shows activity chronologically, from left to right. The CPU and NET charts at the top give you an overview of CPU and network activity. The light brown area in the CPU chart corresponds to a period of time when the browser was busy with scripting activity. This area is a clue that you may be able to speed up page load by doing less JavaScript work.

![A long scripting activity in the CPU chart](./images/perf-busy-script.png)

Investigate the trace to find ways to do less JavaScript work.

> The **Main** section shows a chronological log of main thread activity, from left to right.  The y-axis (top to bottom) shows why events occurred. For example, in the following figure, the browser spends most of the time in a **Parse HTML** event. As long as this event runs, the webpage isn't entirely displayed. This event caused a long **Evaluate Script** event, which corresponds to when the browser executes JavaScript code. The **Evaluate Script** event caused an `(anonymous)` function to run, which caused the `initRatings` function to run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Main** section shows a chronological log of main thread activity, from left to right.  The y-axis (top to bottom) shows why events occurred. For example, in the following figure, the browser spends most of the time in a **Parse HTML** event. As long as this event runs, the webpage isn't entirely displayed. This event caused a long **Evaluate Script** event, which corresponds to when the browser executes JavaScript code.

The **Evaluate Script** event caused an `(anonymous)` function to run, which caused the `initRatings` function to run:
```
arbitrarily break up too-long para. to deliver as series of 2- or 3-sentence paragraphs, separately readable/ility.

Author: Thanks. I think I'll break it earlier, after the "y-axis" sentence. It feels more logical to me. Let me know what you think.

![Events in the Main section of the Performance tool](./images/perf-main-events.png)

Optimize the `initRatings` function to make the page load faster:

1. In Visual Studio Code, open the `/travel-site/assets/rating.js` file and read through the code.

>     The code in this file is responsible for displaying five customer reviews on the webpage. Each review has a rating consisting of several stars, a quote, and an author. These reviews come from a server-side API used in the `getRatings` function, and the `initRatings` function creates DOM elements in the page for each review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The code in this file is responsible for displaying five customer reviews on the webpage. Each review has a rating consisting of several stars, a quote, and an author. These reviews come from a server-side API used in the `getRatings` function.  The `initRatings` function creates DOM elements in the page for each review.
```
two sep statements so two sep sent's.  for readability

1. In the `initRatings` function, find a way to make the JavaScript code faster.

>     This webpage is just a demo and a `for` loop was introduced to slow down the code. In practice, there are many ways for a JavaScript file like this one to cause slow page loads, such as: accessing the DOM too frequently, running heavy computation tasks, using large JavaScript libraries or frameworks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This webpage is just a demo, and a `for` loop was introduced to slow down the code. In practice, there are many ways for a JavaScript file like this one to cause slow page loads, such as: accessing the DOM too frequently, running heavy computation tasks, using large JavaScript libraries or frameworks.
```
opport. for comma, to deliver short separately delineated phrases b/c separate/distinct points.

1. Delete the `for` loop at the beginning of the `initRatings` function, save your changes, and reload the page in Microsoft Edge.

1. Run a new audit in the **Lighthouse** tool to see how your changes affect the load performance:

    ![Your new report, showing a much better score](./images/report-after-for-loop.png)

    Your score went up to 92, and the **Time to interactive** and **Total Blocking Time** metrics are down to 1.3 seconds and 0 seconds respectively.

To learn more about how to analyze page performance, see [Performance features reference)](../evaluate-performance/reference.md).

> ###### Doing less main thread work in the real world

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Doing less main-thread work in the real world
```
alt: 

Doing less work in the main thread, in the real world

The **Performance** tool is the most common way to understand what activity your webpage does as it loads, and to find ways to remove unnecessary activity.

If you prefer an approach that feels more like `console.log()`, the [User Timing API](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/User_Timing_API) enables you to arbitrarily mark up certain phases of your app lifecycle, in order to track how long each of those phases takes.

> Webpages often load slowly when they use JavaScript for generating most of their user interfaces. Moving the code that creates your webpage's user interface to the server-side and delivering it as HTML and CSS to the browser can improve your webpage's performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Webpages often load slowly when they use JavaScript for generating most of their user interfaces.  To improve your webpage's performance, consider moving the code that creates your webpage's user interface to the server side, delivering that code to the browser as HTML and CSS.
```
hyphen would be right if:   server-side code
forming an adjective phrase modifying a following word (that is an alt'v)

    ![Visual Studio Code, showing the index.html code and the new on-demand map script tag](./get-started-images/bing-map-on-demand-script.png)

1. Open the `/travel-site/assets/map-on-demand.js` file in Visual Studio Code and read through the code to understand how it loads and initializes the Bing Map component. Here is a snippet from that code along with a description of how it works:

    ```javascript
    const MAP_CONTAINER_EL = document.querySelector('.place-discover-map');

    const mapElIntersectionObserver = new IntersectionObserver(loadMapOnDemand);
    mapElIntersectionObserver.observe(MAP_CONTAINER_EL);
 
    let map = null;
   
    function loadMapOnDemand(entries) {
       if (map) {
         return;
       }
   
       if (!entries.some(entry => entry.isIntersecting)) {
         return;
       }
   
       const script = document.createElement('script');
       script.type = 'text/javascript';
       script.src = 'https://www.bing.com/api/maps/mapcontrol?callback=GetMap&key=Ap_eazGgpq5468v9MXr7Wu0zh30LQActgaT-tI_QxZQSm-Bd5qJxVKs_2B7NsqR4';
       document.body.appendChild(script);
    }

    function GetMap() { /* ... */ }
    ```

>     The code initializes the `mapElIntersectionObserver` variable to a new IntersectionObserver object. This observer then starts observing the `MAP_CONTAINER_EL` element, which is the element on the page that's meant to contain the map.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The code initializes the `mapElIntersectionObserver` variable to a new `IntersectionObserver` object. This observer then starts observing the `MAP_CONTAINER_EL` element, which is the element on the page that's meant to contain the map.
```

    Your **Lighthouse** score is now at 31, which is an improvement from before, but there are more things to optimize.

#### Eliminate render-blocking resources

The next opportunity displayed in the **Opportunities** section of the **Lighthouse** tool is related to eliminating render-blocking resources.

A render-blocking resource is an external JavaScript or CSS file that the browser must download, parse, and run before it displays the page. The more render-blocking resources need to be processed when a webpage loads, the longer the webpage needs, to start appearing in the browser. Try to only run the core CSS and JavaScript code that's required to display the initial state of the page properly.

The first task, then, is to find code that you don't need to run on page load.

1. Click **Eliminate render-blocking resources** to display the resources that are blocking:

   ![More information about the Eliminate render-blocking resources opportunity](./get-started-images/render-blocking-css.png)

    **Lighthouse** displays a list of the stylesheets that the demo webpage uses, such as: `base.css`, `home.css`, and `map.css`.

> 1. Open the **Coverage** tool again: press `Ctrl`+`Shift`+`P` (Windows, Linux) or `Command`+`Shift`+`P` (macOS), type `Coverage`, and then select **Show Coverage**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the **Coverage** tool again: press `Ctrl`+`Shift`+`P` (Windows, Linux) or `Command`+`Shift`+`P` (macOS), type **Coverage**, and then select **Show Coverage**.
```
previous style research and PRs in this repo concluded that entering text in GUI UI context rather than code editor generally uses bold rather than fixed-width.

#### Do less work in the main thread

Your latest report shows high **Time to Interactive** and **Total Blocking Time** metric values, which means that there's still something on the webpage that takes a long time to run and prevents the page from being usable for several seconds.

Scroll down to the **Diagnostics** section which says to **Minimize main-thread work** and **Reduce JavaScript execution time**. The main thread is where the browser does most of the work that's needed to display a page, such as:

* Parsing and running HTML.
* Parsing and applying CSS to DOM elements. 
* Running JavaScript.

In this case, it looks like the biggest bottleneck is that the page runs too much JavaScript code on page load.

Use the **Performance** tool to analyze what work the main thread is doing while the page loads, and find ways to defer or remove unnecessary work:

1. Open the **Performance** tool.

1. In the **Performance** tool, click **Start profiling and reload the page** (![Refresh](../media/reload-icon.msft.png)), and then click **Stop** once the page has fully loaded.

>     DevTools displays a visualization of all the work that the browser performed in order to load the page. This visualization is referred to as the **trace**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    DevTools displays a visualization of all the work that the browser performed in order to load the page. This visualization is referred to as the _trace_:
```
i need to double check style guides but i go w/ convention that terms being defined = italic.
